JUDY WOODRUFF: Good
evening. I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: A
potentially catastrophic
hurricane bears down on the
Pacific Coast
of Mexico. Residents and
tourists flee, and the country
declares a state of emergency.
Then: seeking a new way forward
in Syria. Secretary of State
Kerry meets with leaders
from Russia and the Middle East.
Old wind turbines come tumbling
down, part of an effort to save
California's golden eagles.
SHAWN SMALLWOOD, Ecologist:
Those are the most dangerous
turbines in the Altamont Pass
on record. There's one
120-kilowatt turbine down there,
now removed, but it's on record
as having killed one eagle
per year for 10 years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
are here to analyze the week's
news.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: A storm for the
ages is blasting ashore on
Mexico's West Coast tonight.
Hurricane
Patricia has the strongest
sustained winds ever recorded in
this part of the world, and
it spent in the day in a
slow-motion assault on the
mainland.
Sirens blared and lights flashed
as police and fire units combed
Puerto Vallarta this
morning, urging people to flee
the popular Mexican Pacific
beach resort. The storm burst
to life Tuesday, and, by last
night, it topped the scale, with
winds of 200 miles an hour,
prompting dire descriptions
from Mexico's weather service.
ROBERTO RAMIREZ, Director,
National Water Commission
(through translator): The
National
Hurricane Center in Miami has
determined that this storm is
the strongest storm ever seen
on the American continent.
Additionally, some international
experts have already noted that
this hurricane is the most
powerful hurricane that has ever
existed on the planet in all of
history.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All told, a
hurricane warning stretched
along more than 300 miles of
Mexico's
Pacific Coast. The storm's track
had its center heading between
the bustling port city of
Manzanillo and Puerto
Vallarta tonight.
Heavy rain started falling last
night, and today people hurried
to board up windows,
as crews filled sandbags. The
region's airports closed, and
tourists rushed to check out and
catch flights.
WOMAN: I'm just worried,
because, if we don't get out of
here -- and we drove into town
to get out, which is not the
direction we wanted to go. So,
if we don't make the flight,
then we're -- we are
riding it out here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Forecasters said
the hurricane will start
weakening tomorrow, as it passes
inland moving north toward
Texas. The remnants will add to
heavy rains already battering
the Lone Star State from
another weather system.
More than 2.5 inches fell at the
Dallas-Fort Worth Airport
yesterday, breaking a record
set in 1908.
MAN: There she goes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And to the west,
flooding at a mobile home park
picked up trailers and
carried them away.
Today, the mayor of Houston
appealed to people to keep an
eye on what's coming.
ANNISE PARKER (D), Mayor of
Houston, Texas: We really
encourage folks to, once the
rain
starts, just stay home
and stay off the roads.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Patricia is
already being compared with
Typhoon Haiyan that left more
than 7,300
dead or missing in the
Philippines two years ago. And,
today, as waves pounded the
Mexican
coast, one expert warned, "It's
looking like a very bad disaster
is shaping up."
We get an on-the- ground
dispatch from a makeshift storm
shelter in Puerto Vallarta.
David Alire Garcia is there for
Reuters. I spoke with him by
Skype late this afternoon
as the hurricane moved
closer to landfall.
David, thank you for
talking with us.
First of all, tell us where you
are and what are the state of
preparations there?
DAVID ALIRE GARCIA, Reuters:
Well, I'm in Puerto Vallarta.
I'm in the Univa Catholic
university campus, which
is a makeshift shelter.
Wasn't supposed to be a shelter,
but because of problems with
other nearby shelters,
particularly
a big convention center and
risks of flooding, this was
opened up. And now there's about
500 people here, a mix of
tourists, but also many locals
as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about the
state of preparations in that
area, Puerto Vallarta?
DAVID ALIRE GARCIA: Well, the
local government, the state
government, the municipal
government
opened up more than a dozen
shelters. There have been
problems with some, like I just
mentioned a second ago, that
have been opened and then closed
because of worries that they're
too close to rivers.
The authorities are everywhere
here. They're trucking in
people. Just a little while ago,
there were a handful of trucks
that arrived. I think this
shelter is about at its
capacity.
But there are thousands of folks
who need shelter, and it's not
entirely clear that
all of them are
going to get that.
But it seems like the
authorities are -- you know, if
you listen to radio or TV,
there's
all kinds of announcements that
people find shelter and find
someplace safe and get off
the streets.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It still appears,
though, that this storm has
formed very, very quickly,
that it wasn't really until late
last night that people
understood the gravity of it.
Do you think -- is it your sense
that people have evacuated who
needed to evacuate?
DAVID ALIRE GARCIA: I think so.
Just earlier, I was driving
around the tourist part of
Puerto Vallarta, and there are
-- you
know, it's a ghost town. Windows
are boarded up. Windows are
taped up. There's sandbags
at the hotels protecting
storefronts, bars, restaurants.
Of course, it's a big tourist
hub here.
So it seems like there is a lot
of preparation going on. Time
will tell if it really is
adequate
for the storm that's
about to arrive.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, as I speak
to you, it's just a little after
4:00 Eastern. It looks
like the weather is still
pretty calm right now.
DAVID ALIRE GARCIA: You know,
that's the crazy thing right now
is that there is barely a
tiny drizzle, that there is
hardly any wind, if you can see
behind me. Right, actually,
here, there's a lot of
folks taking refuge here.
And the weather conditions at
the moment are not that bad,
but, of course, you know, things
are projected to get a lot
worse, particularly the winds,
which could have caused a lot of
damage and have caused damage.
There was a big hurricane here
over -- a few years back
that many people still remember
that did cause lots of damage
because of flying debris.
And so I think that's one of the
main worries, in addition to
flooding in the low-lying areas
here in Puerto Vallarta, that
most people are concerned about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we hope you
and everyone else is able to
stay safe.
David Alire Garcia,
we thank you.
DAVID ALIRE GARCIA: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will turn to
how this storm got so big so
fast after the news summary.
In other news, Two dozen states,
including West Virginia, Texas,
and Florida, went to
federal court today to block
curbs on carbon dioxide
emissions. The U.S.
Environmental
Protection Agency's Clean Power
Plan seeks to curb the power
plant emissions by 32 percent
in 2030 from 2005 levels. The
states say the move is illegal
overreach and will devastate
their economies.
For the second time this week, a
candidate has dropped out of the
contest for the Democratic
presidential nomination. Lincoln
Chafee, former Rhode Island
senator and governor, and
one-time
Republican, had struggled to
raise money and make any
impression in the polls. Chafee
made
his announcement today during a
speech to a Democratic women's
event in Washington.
LINCOLN CHAFEE (D), Presidential
Candidate: I pledge all my
energy towards a big 2016
victory for Democrats across the
country. But after much thought,
I have decided to
end my campaign for the
president today. Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Former Virginia
Senator Jim Webb dropped out of
the Democratic race a
couple of days ago.
On the Republican side, there
was word that Jeb Bush is
imposing across-the-board salary
cuts for his staff, and is
downsizing his campaign
headquarters in Miami. News
accounts
cited an internal memo on
this -- money-saving moves.
Suicide bombers killed and
wounded scores of Muslims today
in Nigeria and Pakistan.
At least 42 people died in
Nigeria in attacks on mosques in
two cities. More than a hundred
others were wounded. Far to the
northeast in a city in Southern
Pakistan, a suicide
bomber killed at least 18 people
in a Shiite religious
procession.
The Balkan nations of Serbia and
Croatia have agreed to move more
refugees by train, and
get them out of the rain and
cold. Last night, at least 5,000
people spent the night in
near-freezing
weather near one border
crossing. The Croatian interior
minister called it -- quote --
"torture."
Meanwhile,
Greece reported a record 48,000
people crossed this week from
Turkey. Prime Minister Alexis
Tsipras said it has to stop.
ALEXIS TSIPRAS, Greek Prime
Minister (through translator):
Only if we are able to transfer
the front line from the Greek
islands to the Turkish shores,
and start the process of
resettling
refugees from the Turkish shores
towards Europe, and not from the
Greek islands to other European
nations, can we then hope to
face and diminish these huge
refugee influxes that are
impossible
to cope with today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The government of
Turkey, in turn, warned that a
new wave of refugees is
coming, as thousands more
Syrians flee a military
offensive backed by Russian
airstrikes.
Police in Sweden now say that a
masked man who attacked a school
with a sword and knife
yesterday was motivated by race.
He killed two people and wounded
two in Trollhattan.
It's a town with a large
immigrant population. All of the
victims were dark-skinned.
Today,
mourners paid their respects at
a makeshift memorial, while the
local police chief reported
on the investigation.
NICLAS HALLGREN, Trollhattan
Police Chief: We have discovered
a letter in his apartment,
and it has some notes in it that
tells us that he has planned the
act and he also -- he
planned it out of a hate crime
perspective. And he's also told
us by that letter that
he is going to -- he considers
that this will be his final act.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The attack came
as it was announced that as many
as 190,000 asylum seekers may
enter Sweden this year alone.
But, today, the government
agreed to restrict the country's
liberal immigration policies.
France has suffered its
deadliest auto accident in more
than 30 years; 43 people were
killed
today in a collision between a
tour bus and a truck. It
happened on a narrow road near
a town that's about 30
miles east of Bordeaux.
Simon Israel of Independent
Television News filed this
report.
SIMON ISRAEL: A group of
pensioners all from the same
village were on their way to
savor
the delights of traditional
French cuisine. Their coach
collided head on with a lorry
carrying wood.
There was, in the words of a
fire chief, a gigantic blaze; 41
on the coach were killed,
but eight survived because the
driver opened the doors barely
seconds before the crash.
French television has broadcast
a reconstruction of one possible
version of events where the
coach came around a blind
corner just before the crash.
Traumatized families gathered in
the town of Puisseguin to wait
for news. Identification
will clearly take some time.
WOMAN (through translator): I'm
hoping, yes, but I don't know
anything. I don't know. I'm
waiting.
SIMON ISRAEL: The French prime
minister was among various
government officials to visit
the scene today to express what
he described as the nation's
emotion for an appalling
catastrophe.
Among the dead is also believed
to be the lorry driver and his
young son, who was by
his side.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A local lawmaker
said the wreck happened on a
dangerous curve. The president
of France promised
an investigation.
Back in this country, an
American soldier killed in a
hostage rescue in Iraq was
praised
today as a hero who sacrificed
himself. Army Master Sergeant
Joshua Wheeler helped to free
some 70 captives being held by
Islamic State forces. Defense
Secretary Ash Carter said
that Wheeler sacrificed himself
by joining a firefight to aid
Kurdish soldiers that he
was advising.
Former IRS official Lois Lerner
will not face criminal charges
for allegedly targeting Tea
Party groups. The Justice
Department ended a two-year
probe today, and said that it
found
no evidence that anyone at the
IRS acted out of political
motives. Lerner once headed the
unit that handles applications
for tax-exempt status.
And on Wall Street today, a
rally in tech stocks helped push
the broader market higher.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 157 points to close at
17646. The Nasdaq rose
nearly 112 points. And
the S&P 500 rose 22.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what's next for the strongest
hurricane on record in the
Western Hemisphere; world
leaders seek a solution in
Syria; new wind turbines could
be a lifesaver
for golden eagles,
and much more.
Hurricane Patricia has been
described as potentially one of
the most dangerous storms to
ever hit
the Western Hemisphere.
Meteorologists now say that
Patricia is bringing with it
winds
of 190 miles an hour, down
just slightly from earlier.
William Brangham has more on the
storm itself and what is fueling
it. He recorded this interview
a short time ago, as the storm
was approaching Mexico.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Bob Henson is
a meteorologist for Weather
Underground, a Web-based weather
service that also has a weekday
show on The Weather Channel.
Henson is also author of
five books on weather
and climate change.
So, Bob Henson, it seems like
meteorologists like yourself
have run out of terms to
describe
the intensity of the storm.
Yesterday, it was a Category 1.
We wake up this morning,
it's a Category 5. How did
this storm get so big so fast?
BOB HENSON, Weather Underground:
It's a true outlier.
You know, there's only a very,
very few hurricanes or typhoons
in world history that we know
about that have intensified so
quickly. They have really only
been observing these systems
in depth for the last several
decades, say, so we can't really
say how strong hurricanes
were in 1900 or 1800.
But, certainly in the modern era
of hurricane hunting and
satellites, for a storm to go
to from a tropical storm to a
Cat 5 in, say, 24 hours,, 30
hours, those kinds of numbers
only happen once in a very rare
while. So, this is up in the
ranks of maybe the top three
or four most rapidly
strengthening storms.
And, basically, it's because it
was over extremely warm water
that went to some depth, so the
winds didn't stir up colder
water to weaken it. And upper
winds were very weak, which
allowed it to intensify rapidly.
Really, just all the ingredients
came together in just
the right way, which,
surprisingly, doesn't happen all
that often.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You mentioned
that calling this a Category 5,
which is the top of the
Saffir-Simpson scale, is almost
an insufficient description of
this storm. Can you explain?
BOB HENSON: Yes.
The Saffir-Simpson scale was
developed several decades ago,
and it breaks hurricanes down
into five bins, Category 1 all
the way up to Category 5. Now,
most of those bins are
about
28-to-30-miles-per-hour-wide,
you might put it. Category 5
starts at 156 miles an
hour, but it has no
ceiling. It's 156 and up.
This storm had peak winds of
200, so it was 45 miles an hour
above the Category 5 threshold.
You might say that, if we had a
Cat 6 and Cat 7, that it would
fall in the Cat 7 range,
close to that. We don't parse
storms out when they get so
strong, in part because once you
get to Cat 5, it pretty much
destroys everything except a
really well-constructed
building,
so there is not as much
operational significance to it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, at that
level of intensity, is that what
we're expecting that is going
to just cause some incredible
damage on the coast of Mexico?
BOB HENSON: Well, fortunately,
it has weakened a little bit as
it has approached land. It's
still a very, very powerful
hurricane, still a Category 5,
as in the most recent
observations
within the last couple of hours.
Now, the storm surge is going to
be pretty significant over a
relatively small area.
And that's another blessing with
this storm. It's not a gigantic
hurricane. But there will
be an area of a few miles where
I would expect very, very severe
destruction. And, moreover,
when it runs into very steep
mountains and hillsides just
inland, it is going to be
dumping
gigantic amounts of rain, again,
over not a gigantic area, but
there could be tremendous
amounts of rain along the way.
So, mudslides and floods are
also going to be a real issue.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And then my
understanding is that the storm
is likely to continue on
breaking up somewhat, but then
heading into Southern Texas.
What are you forecasting for
Texas to be looking at?
BOB HENSON: Still pretty stout
winds. There will be some high
water along the Texas coast,
but mainly a lot of rain. Could
be six to 12 inches of rain in
places like Houston.
And there is an ongoing heavy
rain event over Texas already
because of a separate storm,
so there's going to be some
very, very large local rainfall
amounts. And Texas is notorious
for October systems that bring
in tropical moisture and
ex-hurricanes from the Pacific.
So this is really something
to watch as well.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: OK.
Bob Henson of Weather
Underground, thank you very
much.
BOB HENSON: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Secretary of
State John Kerry met in Vienna
today with his counterparts
from Russia, Turkey and Saudi
Arabia in a renewed quest to
find a political settlement
for the war in Syria.
He spoke to reporters
afterwards.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: Today, we came here aware
of all of the pitfalls,
aware of all of the hurdles.
Every foreign minister here has
been wrestling with this
issue for a period of time. But
we came here with a commitment
to try to find new ideas
for how to break the impasse
and end the conflict.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This came after
an agreement Monday between the
U.S. and Russian militaries
on how to avoid accidental
midair collisions as both
countries bomb Syria. And also
that
day, Syrian President Assad met
with President Putin in Moscow.
It was the first time Assad
has left Syria since
the war began in 2011.
For more on the state of play
between the U.S. and Russia over
Syria, we turn to "NewsHour"
chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret Warner,
who has been following all of
this.
Margaret, thank you.
So, we know that the U.S.,
Russia and these other countries
have been trying for two years,
at least, to talk about, to find
a political settlement. No
results. Today any different?
MARGARET WARNER: It's
very hard to tell, Judy.
The one thing that indicates
there maybe progress is that
they agreed they are going to
meet
again next week, at the end of
next week. Well, when Secretary
Kerry said, well, people
brought a lot of new ideas,
publicly, we heard no new ideas.
What we heard was the same
mantra:
We all agree it should be a
united Syria, it should be
democratic, and secular, and
be diverse.
But there was no resolution of
this huge hump over Assad's
future. And, you know, Turkey
and Saudi want him gone now.
Russia wants -- afraid of the
chaos that could result if
he were to fall precipitously
and wants him to stay. The U.S.
is the only one that has
shown nay leg on that. It was
pretty clear from what Kerry
said today that the U.S. is
willing to consider a transition
in which Assad may remain for a
while.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Margaret, what
effect is Russia's military
intervention in Syria, which the
U.S. has not been happy with,
what effect is that having on
those talks?
MARGARET WARNER: Well,
it's interesting.
Secretary Kerry has been telling
aides that actually this could
be an opportunity, that
it could be an action-forcing
event, even though, as you said,
the U.S. was furious
about this, because
it strengthens Assad.
But the fact is, it has given
Russia a different seat at the
table in terms of figuring out
Syria's future. One, it means
Russia has now a real interest
in getting this resolved
politically,
or it's going to be sitting
there -- it's going to be
bombing forever. It's going to
be in a kind of
military quagmire.
So, it's also forced the United
States, you have noticed, to up
its game in Syria, more
weapons to the rebels. It
revived the discussion
internally about whether to
establish a no-fly
zone. So, there is a feeling
that, to a great extent, of
course, the U.S. doesn't trust
what Putin's up to, but that
something may happen as a
result.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, what about
the meeting that happened this
week in Moscow where Assad
flew to Moscow to meet with
Putin? What's known about that?
MARGARET WARNER: What is known
about that, at least from
Russian sources I have -- and
it was secondhand -- is that,
one, it was very chilly. As one
said to me, no one likes
Assad.
Two, that Putin was very firm
about, one, they wanted to
coordinate Russian airpower
with Syrian ground troops. He
made it clear that Russia wasn't
going to send in ground
troops, but he also wanted to
make sure the targeting was good
so they didn't kill a mass
of civilians, that
the Russians didn't.
But then they did discuss the
transition, but I'm told that
though they talked about
the need for a diverse one, and
Assad, of course, of course,
that in fact Putin didn't
pull the trigger and say, and,
you know, Mr. President Assad,
that will mean you have to
go.
So one person said to me, I have
a feeling they were talking past
each other.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Margaret, if
Putin wants some kind of
improved relationship with the
U.S., wants to work something
out, what are the prospects for
that happening?
MARGARET WARNER: Well, the
administration believes they're
not great, but that if -- there
are two things he could do, one,
change the targeting from 85 to
90 percent moderate rebels,
which is who he is hitting now,
instead of ISIS, and, two,
really use his enhanced leverage
now with Assad, because he's got
Assad's back, to really push
Assad to recognize that,
ultimately,
he has to agree to a
process in which he goes.
And why would we do that? One,
because he's so eager to end his
international isolation
and the sanctions. And, two, as
I referred to earlier, he now
has reason to fear of being
sucked into kind of military
quicksand in Syria, if it just
goes on and on and on and
there's no political solution.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Margaret Warner,
some great reporting. We thank
you.
MARGARET WARNER: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Benghazi, presidential politics,
and Paul Ryan, we discuss it all
with Mark Shields and David
Brooks; and who's in charge of
American schools? -- journalist
Dale Russakoff investigates
in her new book.
But, first, we turn to the topic
of wind power. It's the
country's fastest growing energy
source, expected
to triple by 2040.
But the giant wind turbines can
also pose a threat to wildlife.
Thousands of birds are
killed each year when they run
into turbines or are hit by
their blades. Now scientists
at one of the nation's oldest
wind farms have developed a
strategy to help save protected
species.
Our colleagues at public TV
station KQED in San Francisco
bring you this story produced
by Gabriela Quiros and
narrated by Scott Shafer.
SCOTT SHAFER: The Altamont Pass,
east of San Francisco, is home
to hundreds of bird species.
They hunt and play in the midst
of 3,000 wind turbines, which
can be deadly, especially
to golden eagles.
MAN: There's an
eagle right there.
MAN: Eagle, eagle,
eagle, eagle, eagle.
MAN: Right here flying below...
MAN: OK, below the horizon.
SCOTT SHAFER: Biologists Doug
Bell, Shawn Smallwood and Joe
DiDonato study golden eagles.
MAN: We have got some good wind
going today, so this might be a
good day for seeing a few
eagles.
DOUG BELL, East Bay Regional
Park District: The Altamont Pass
Wind Resource Area is within
and adjacent to one of the
densest nesting populations of
golden eagles in the world.
SCOTT SHAFER: Golden eagles are
protected under federal law.
According to county estimates,
35 golden eagles were killed by
the Altamont's turbines in 2013.
DOUG BELL: Their population is
going down the drain. The
Altamont is killing more eagles
than the local population
can reproduce.
KRYSTA ROGERS, California
Department of Fish and Wildlife:
The primary injury on this bird
is the left wing. The
carpal bone is shattered.
SCOTT SHAFER: Today, Krysta
Rogers of the California
Department of Fish and Wildlife
Examines a golden eagle that was
found injured on an Altamont
Pass wind farm. The bird had
to be euthanized.
KRYSTA ROGERS: We describe this
as blunt-force trauma, which is
consistent with a wind turbine
strike, given the location
where the bird was found.
MAN: The transmitter is going to
stay on here about three years.
SCOTT SHAFER: The dead golden
eagle was one of 18 that
researchers had been tracking.
Though four of them have died
after hitting turbines,
scientists were still able to
recover
valuable data.
DOUG BELL: One of the more
valuable things that we have
learned from our transmitters
that we placed on eagles is that
they use the Altamont a lot.
They go in and out throughout
the course of the year. They
will spend weeks at a time
there.
SCOTT SHAFER: For more than a
decade, environmental groups
have been trying to get wind
companies
to protect birds in this area,
says the Audubon Society's
Michael Lynes.
MICHAEL LYNES, Audubon Society:
The Altamont was sort of seen as
a black eye for renewable
energy, because any time someone
was proposing a new wind farm,
it would raise the specter
of the Altamont Pass.
SCOTT SHAFER: After chapters of
the Audubon Society and other
environmental groups sued
to get birds protected, wind
companies agreed to take down
old wind turbines.
MICHAEL LYNES: We wanted to move
towards getting the old turbines
out of the Altamont Pass
because, in a process called
repowering, up to 30 old
turbines can be replaced with
one
single new turbine, which then
results usually in significantly
less bird mortality.
SCOTT SHAFER: At this wind farm,
300 turbines are coming down and
being replaced by only
10 new ones, which together will
produce double the amount of
electricity, enough to power
12,000 homes for a year.
RICK MILLER, EDF Renewable
Energy: It's time to pull the
old machines down and put new
ones up.
SCOTT SHAFER: Rick Miller of EDF
Renewable Energy, which owns the
wind farm, says the
repowering process will cost $35
million and is facilitated by
federal tax credits for
wind energy.
RICK MILLER: The turbines are
becoming much larger, much
larger rotor diameters and much
taller towers. So we have really
been able to reduce the number
of turbines required
to produce a tremendous amount
of energy from the same site.
SCOTT SHAFER: And that means
there are fewer turbines for
birds to hit. Companies can also
place the turbines
more strategically.
SHAWN SMALLWOOD, Ecologist:
Three hundred meters above
ground.
SCOTT SHAFER: Ecologist Shawn
Smallwood advises companies on
where to put their turbines to
minimize bird deaths.
SHAWN SMALLWOOD: This is where
the old turbines were, and this
is also where the burrowing
owls nest. And so the fatality
rate was pretty high.
SCOTT SHAFER: This wind farm was
one of the first to get new,
more efficient turbines.
SHAWN SMALLWOOD: When we
repower, we put the new turbines
up on the top of the hill, where
the burrowing owls are not. So,
our burrowing owl fatality rate
dropped to zero in three
years of monitoring,
and that's why.
SCOTT SHAFER: Smallwood says
that when wind energy companies
first installed over 7,000
turbines in the Altamont Pass in
the 1980s, they gave little
consideration to bird safety.
SHAWN SMALLWOOD: Those are the
most dangerous turbines in the
Altamont Pass on record. There's
one 120-kilowatt turbine down
there, now removed, but it's on
record as having killed one
eagle
per year for 10 years. And the
reason is because there's a lot
of eagle traffic through the
lowest spots of the
Altamont Pass.
SCOTT SHAFER: Birds fly lower in
some areas to avoid wind
resistance and to hunt for prey.
But, with their keen eyesight
focused on the ground, eagles
might not see a wind turbine
blade until it's too late.
SHAWN SMALLWOOD: Social
interactions are very important.
So, an eagle responding to other
eagles, chase each other around
or chase some other birds, these
are dangerous social
interactions
that lead up to what we
call events, near-misses.
SCOTT SHAFER: The federal
government is increasing
enforcement of laws aimed at
protecting golden
eagles, including bringing
criminal charges against two
companies whose turbines killed
golden eagles in Wyoming.
Scott Flaherty of the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service says that
was a significant step.
SCOTT FLAHERTY, U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service: The
prosecution of those two
companies certainly
sent a message to companies
across the country there is
incentive there to come in and
work
with us.
SCOTT SHAFER: That incentive is
a new permitting system that
allows companies to kill a
limited
number of eagles each year. Even
the Audubon Society's Michael
Lynes sees permits as a
positive step.
MICHAEL LYNES: Before, it was
sort of chaos. There was no real
regulation. There was no
real enforcement. And we know
birds were getting killed in
large numbers. Now we can
actually
keep track of that. We can hold
people accountable, and we can
take steps to remedy the
problem.
SCOTT SHAFER: As the U.S.
increases its wind power
capability, scientists,
including Shawn
Smallwood, believe fewer
turbines and better placement
are key to protecting wildlife.
SHAWN SMALLWOOD: We have learned
a lot here. And so it should be
the number one laboratory
in the country for learning what
not to do wrong with wind
development around the rest
of the country.
SCOTT SHAFER: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm Scott Shafer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's been a busy
week in the political world.
Hillary Clinton testified during
a marathon Benghazi Committee
hearing. Paul Ryan says
yes to run for speaker of the
House, and Republican Ben Carson
surpasses Donald Trump in the
polls
in Iowa.
For all of that, we turn to the
analysis of Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist
Mark Shields and New York
Times columnist David Brooks.
Welcome, gentlemen.
MARK SHIELDS: You're
welcome. Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Benghazi
hearings, David, they went -- I
don't know that it was 11,
but it was eight or nine
hours of testimony.
DAVID BROOKS: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What have we
learned? What was accomplished
at this hearing?
DAVID BROOKS: Nothing
was learned.
We learned that the Republicans
can't stump Hillary Clinton. She
was composed, gave a
lot of the same testimony she's
given before. This thing has
been going on forever. And
so nothing happened, really. And
so that's good news for her.
She -- her composure was
excellent. Congressmen do what
congressmen do. And so it was a
big
nothing burger. And why the
Republicans remain obsessed with
this, at a time when the nation
of Iraq has ceased to exist,
Syria barely exists, there's
turmoil spreading throughout
the Middle East -- if you want
to attack Hillary Clinton, it
seems to me she was secretary
of state at a time of
deterioration in actual
substantive grounds. Maybe that
would be a
good subject.
But there is a certain psychosis
that goes through people's
minds, especially about
scandals,
but Clinton scandals, where they
-- where something smells, and
they think there must
be something big, and they
imagine there is about to be
some big revelation that will
destroy their careers. But,
since 1991, that has never
happened, and the critics have
always
overshot the mark and ended up
helping the candidate. And
that's what happened.
JUDY WOODRUFF: They have
survived some challenges in the
past, the Clintons, but, Mark,
nothing
burger, is that
what it adds up to?
MARK SHIELDS: I would feel
better if it were just the
Clintons with the Republicans. I
think this has been -- for the
past seven years of the Obama
administration, it has
been an obsession that -- to
prove not simply that the
administration is not capable or
efficient or effective, but that
somehow it's evil, maybe even
criminal.
And that's what was driving this
Benghazi hearing, that somehow
that there was some
evil plot or evil scheme or
diabolical whatever. The
emphasis on Sid Blumenthal, who
was a...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Her
longtime friend.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, longtime
friend, controversial, a
conspiracy buff, an apparatchik,
whatever
else he is, but, I mean, hardly
somebody of Rasputin dimensions
that they wanted to elevate
him to.
And in doing so, they were
forced to go public with this
hearing, which they didn't want
to do. They looked
bad. They had...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meaning
the Republicans.
MARK SHIELDS: The
Republicans looked bad.
Hillary Clinton looked
disciplined. She showed
remarkable stamina. She showed
thorough preparation.
And she never went for the bait.
The bait was to get her to do
what she had done in
the previous hearing, to show
exasperation, to display temper.
And she just -- she came off it,
to use an adjective,
presidential. And I just think
-- I just think that the
Republicans ought to drop this
and move on, but I think it is
-- I think it is symptomatic of
a party that is incapable of
accepting its governing
responsibility.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just quickly,
David, Republicans, how -- are
they hurt by this or do they
just
move on?
DAVID BROOKS: Not really. I
don't think they're really hurt.
I don't take the broad
indictment.
Sometimes, a scandal cottage
industry gets started, and it's
fed by people who get expertise,
and then the talk radio get into
it, and they get into the weeds.
And they imagine something
that big is about to happen, and
the scandal cottage industries
just go on forever.
And they think they hurt Hillary
Clinton's poll numbers this way,
but I swear, if they
want to take a real issue, the
disarray of our Middle East
policy is a real issue.
Benghazi,
if you list our foreign policy
issues of importance, it would
be number 197.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I think you have
to say, Mark, this was a pretty
good week for former Secretary
of State Clinton, not only the
general interpretation of the
hearings, the fact that she
doesn't
have an opponent that many
people thought she could have in
Vice President Joe Biden.
He said he's not running.
Where does that leave
everything? What did you make of
his decision? Were you
surprised?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, I was
surprised, because I didn't
know.
Everybody who said they knew who
was talking didn't know, and
everybody who apparently
knew wasn't talking. But I
didn't know that he wasn't going
to run.
I will say this about Joe Biden.
His absence means that the happy
warrior will be missing
from the Democratic battle this
year. That's what Joe -- Joe
Biden has personally at least
35 percent of the world's known
reserve of authenticity.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: And we're
looking for the authentic.
Lindsey Graham, Republican from
South Carolina, who is himself a
presidential candidate and
an active partisan, said of Joe
Biden, if you don't like Joe
Biden, you ought take a
serious look at yourself,
because there is something wrong
with you.
He is the nicest person I have
ever met. God never made a
better man than Joe Biden. This
was before Joe Biden pulled out.
This was just in an interview in
Iowa a couple -- a
month or so ago. So I just think
it takes a lot of courage to
run. It takes a lot more
courage to pull out. And I just
-- I will miss him and his
presence in this race.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The fact that
he's not in, what effect does it
have?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. Well,
obviously, it makes Hillary even
more -- she's gone from the
doldrums
of three months ago now to the
unstoppable behemoth that no one
can touch in the course
of a week.
MARK SHIELDS: That's right.
DAVID BROOKS: It does take away
some of the joy. Biden could be
very eloquent, very much
in touch with working-class
voters. He comes from that
background.
And the other thing about what
he did, the guy was elected
senator, I think, when he
was 29.
MARK SHIELDS:
Twenty-nine. He was.
DAVID BROOKS: And he's now
looking at the end of his
political career. And he's a
political
creature. He loves politics. He
loves talking to people. And so
even getting out of the
race means that his political
career will end with the
administration, one presumes.
And that's a hard thing for a
guy to say, because he's been
serving all his life and
he's loved the act of service.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Somebody who is
taking -- or trying to take a
step up in his political
career, Mark, is Paul Ryan, who
decided this week that he is
going to run for speaker of
the House. He managed to get
enough of not just Republicans,
but very conservative
Republicans,
to say they're going
to support him.
How did he do that? To do what
John Boehner and Kevin McCarthy
couldn't do, how did this
happen?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, I think
there were a convergence of
things.
Paul Ryan is a near unique
figure in the Republican House,
in the Republican Party. He's
been
a leader on philosophical and
ideological issues. He was the
candidate for vice president.
He's been a leader within the
caucus and respected across all
the divisions.
He laid down conditions, that he
would only accept speakership
and seek it under certain
conditions. Interesting, one was
family and parental leave,
something Republicans have
consistently opposed.
But Paul Ryan...
JUDY WOODRUFF: For himself.
MARK SHIELDS: Paul Ryan wants it
for himself. He wants to spend
-- admirably, he wants to
spend time with his children,
who are in their formative and
teen years.
Would that he would extend this
to all parents. And I'm sure he
will now that he's speaker,
about to be speaker.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: But I think, Judy,
it was an acknowledgment on the
part of Republicans
of just how desperate their
straits were, that they couldn't
continue to flounder around
as they have.
This is a party, right now,
according to the Wall Street
Journal/NBC and other polls,
that
the party members have no
respect for the party leaders.
And they think -- Republicans
think their own party is in
terrible shape, and whereas
Democrats, either rightly or
wrongly,
think that the Democratic Party
is doing fine or doing OK.
But -- so I just think that this
was an acknowledgement that they
had to turn and swallow some of
their differences.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How does -- what
is it about him, David, that
wasn't acceptable, I mean,
that wasn't there in Boehner and
McCarthy? What does he bring?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, partly, the
Freedom Caucus changed. They are
good at destroying. They're
not good at constructing. And
they knew they needed a leader.
There had to be some party
leader to end what was going on.
And so when Ryan went in to meet
with them, he said, well, if you
want me, fine. I'm out
of here. I don't need this. But
then he looked at their ideas
about changing the way Congress
works, and he didn't concede to
any of them, but he said, well,
those sound like decent
ideas. We will discuss it.
So he showed a little respect.
And they softened. And, mostly,
they softened, and because they
had no real alternative. And so
it was their softening, his
display of respect, and the
fact that he is a -- he is the
most policy-oriented speaker
probably of our lifetimes.
There have been a lot of
politicians who have been
speaker, but he is a policy
person primarily.
And he has worked with
Democrats, with Patty Murray.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
DAVID BROOKS: He's done some
really tough stuff that he had
to persuade his own party
to endorse, some
entitlement reforms.
And so I think he may actually
help the Republican image,
because, A, he's just an
attractive
guy. He's a nice guy. He's an
outgoing, friendly guy. But, B,
he actually does care about
policies.
And he will be a little more
aggressive in promoting
policies.
And the Tea Party was right
about Boehner. He wasn't
aggressive in promoting ideas.
And
so Democrats were coming out
with proposals and ideas, and
Republicans had a black hole.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But does this
mean, though, that they're going
to -- because he's in place,
that they are now going to be
able to reach agreement on the
debt ceiling and do something
about the highway bill? Does
this mean things are going to
get done now that weren't --
they
couldn't get done before?
DAVID BROOKS: I find it hard to
believe that they would ruin his
early phase by going -- shutting
down the government and not
doing the debt ceiling.
Further down the road,
obviously, he will have the same
problems that Boehner had.
MARK SHIELDS: The party -- the
job description speaker in the
past has not consisted of
including
policy, other than Newt
Gingrich, who was really the
exception there.
I think, Judy, he's making -- in
part of a concession, he's
making a mistake. And I think
that the speaker's job
description has been the one
person who can hold that caucus
together.
And one of the tools used to do
it -- and John Boehner did it
tirelessly, and so did
Nancy Pelosi -- and that is to
go out and speak to members in
their own districts, to
raise money for them.
And Paul Ryan, as I mentioned
earlier, doesn't want to do
that. I don't think you can
subcontract
that out. I really don't. I
think -- and you can't say, gee,
I can't make it this week.
Can Sam or Sally do it?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why
is that important?
MARK SHIELDS: Because it's the
speaker. And it's a
transactional, personal
relationship
the speaker has with his
members: And I -- remember,
David, I came in when you had
that tough primary
and I said -- and I
need you on this one.
And that's part of being
speaker. I think it's an added
feature that Paul Ryan brings
to it, this policy dimension.
But there is no guarantee that
the Freedom Caucus is not
going to bring a motion to
vacate, which is, of course,
what drove John Boehner
ultimately,
which is a vote
of no confidence.
And I just -- I think David's
right. John Boehner will try to
clear the decks of as
many as he can of these
controversial items before he
leaves. But December 11 is the
big
day. That's when the government
has to be funded. And it's going
to mean probably taking
the caps off of discretionary
spending and defense spending.
And I think that's where
you're going to see the Freedom
Caucus really rise up.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, very
quick, less than a minute,
David.
New poll numbers out in Iowa
that show a surge, at least over
the last two months, for Ben
Carson. He's up 10 points over
what he was in August. Trump is
down a little bit. Cruz
is up. What's going on?
DAVID BROOKS: Two things. The
evangelicals are coalescing
around Carson, and, two, there
are a lot of women who will not
vote for Trump. And so he's
doing poorly among women.
And so I think that is what is
happening there. I still am of
the belief that neither of them
is going to get the nomination.
And so I look to...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Neither
Trump nor Carson?
DAVID BROOKS: And I look to --
just because that's not the way
history has worked so far.
History sometimes changes.
But Rubio did well in that poll,
so I'm looking at him as the
alternative, if we ever get
normal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And then Jeb
Bush, Mark, announced today he's
cutting back on staff, cutting
back on his big --
his headquarters.
MARK SHIELDS: Never known a
winning candidate to cut back on
staff spending or to close
offices. So, it isn't good.
I agree with David about Ben
Carson. And he is broadly
acceptable to more people in the
Republican Party. Peter Hart did
a focus group this week of 12
Republican voters in Indiana,
and it came through, their
admiration, affection for him,
his moral leadership, and
they're
-- the doubts and
skepticism about Trump.
And I think this is a problem
that the Republicans have to
deal with. Experience and
holding
an office in this year has
become a liability among
Republicans office seekers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: OK. Fascinating.
Mark Shields, David Brooks,
we thank you, as always.
And just a quick reminder. You
can now get Mark and David
delivered to your inbox. Find
the subscribe link at the top of
our home page to receive our
politics newsletter, and
be the first to watch Shields
and Brooks every week online.
You can find the link
at PBS.org/NewsHour.
It was meant to be a
game-changer for public
education in Newark, New Jersey,
a plan launched
five years ago that might show
the entire country how to remake
failing urban schools.
Reporter Dale Russakoff
chronicled what became of those
efforts in her new book, "The
Prize:
Who's in Charge of
America's Schools?"
William Brangham recently spoke
with her for our "NewsHour"
Bookshelf.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It started
with an unlikely trio, Newark's
Democratic Mayor Cory Booker,
the state's Republican Governor
Chris Christie, and Facebook
billionaire Mark Zuckerberg,
who offered a whopping $100
million grant. They made the
announcement on "Oprah."
The money was to be used to help
implement many oft school reform
efforts being tried
out nationwide, boost pay for
the best teachers, open more
charter schools and close the
failing
ones. And there have been
successes. Last year, 20 percent
of Newark's black students
were enrolled in -- quote --
"above-average schools." That's
up from 12 percent in 2010,
but those gains came at a price.
The community remains
distrustful of the reforms and
the
exodus to charter schools
has fueled a budget crisis.
In her new book, "The Prize:
Who's in Charge of America's
Schools?" former Washington Post
reporter Dale Russakoff details
where reformers got it right and
where things went wrong.
I talked with her recently about
how Newark's schools and
students are doing five years
on.
Dale Russakoff, thanks
for joining us.
DALE RUSSAKOFF, Author, "The
Prize: Who's in Charge of
America's Schools?": Thanks for
having me.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In your book,
you write that the trio behind
this initial effort,
Cory Booker, Chris Christie, and
Mark Zuckerberg, you write about
them this way -- quote -- "Their
stated goal was not to repair
education in Newark, but to
develop a model for saving
it in all of urban America
and to do it in five years."
That is a breathtakingly
ambitious goal. What was their
plan?
DALE RUSSAKOFF: Well, actually,
I think they wanted, first of
all, to repair education
in Newark first, but they saw
that they could create some kind
of a model that could then
be scaled up almost like a
start-up business, which is the
way Zuckerberg would be
comfortable
thinking about it at that time.
But what they thought they would
do was bring in charter schools
and dramatically expand
the existing footprint of the
charter schools, and then also
turn the school district into
their version of a
high-performing business, with
accountability all through the
system
for the teachers and the
principals and using the student
performance as the metric that
everyone had to focus on.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I mean, it has
been now five years, their
stated time frame. How is
it going in Newark? How
are the kids doing?
DALE RUSSAKOFF: Well, the
charter schools in Newark have
doubled in -- the enrollment
has doubled, and 40 percent of
children in Newark now go to
charter schools, and almost
50 percent of African-American
children go to charter schools.
There has been a big exodus,
particularly in the most
high-poverty districts, which
also are the ones with the most
-- the highest proportion of
African-American kids. Those
skills have performed a lot
better than the district
schools. And so the children in
those
schools are definitely doing
better than they probably would
have done in the district
schools.
As children leave the district
schools, the money follows them.
And there is a huge budget
crisis. There was a $16 million
gap in the school budget. They
have had to close and
consolidate schools. Thousands
of kids have had to change
schools because schools were
closing or consolidating.
Teachers have been laid off.
Support staff, which is a huge
factor in Newark because there
is so much poverty, extreme
poverty, violence, family
dysfunction, the lack of support
staff
is a real problem. So, there's a
lot of factors that are
affecting the district schools,
but
in spite of major effort, they
have not improved. In many
cases, they have gotten worse.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: One of the
things that you chronicle so
devastatingly in your book is
the failure of the reformers to
bring the community into the
process from the get-go.
Even from the very beginning,
many people learned about this
simply by watching Oprah
on television. How much of that
do you think was a factor in the
results that they have
gotten?
DALE RUSSAKOFF: Well, I don't
know how much of a factor it is
in the student achievement
results, but certainly in the
opposition that the community
rallied against this effort,
that it was the factor.
You know, people have asked me,
was it the unions that brought
upon the reformers all
this opposition? I honestly
don't think the unions were
capable of bringing this much
opposition.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It was
just there organically?
DALE RUSSAKOFF: Well, I think
the unions helped fan it, but I
think that because this whole
effort was done from outside,
was done to Newark, instead of
with Newark -- that's the
phrase you hear all the time.
The word you hear most often in
Newark in response to this whole
effort is disrespect.
People felt disrespected. And so
I think ordinary parents just
ended up flooding every public
meeting, every school board
meeting, and just trying to stop
this in its tracks.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Do you think
that would have been different?
Do you think if they
had actively tried to bring the
community along from the
beginning, that it would have
been different?
DALE RUSSAKOFF: Well, you know,
I think bringing the community
along is a complicated idea.
I think, had there been a real
effort to find out from the best
teachers in the district
what do you need to succeed,
what does the school need to
succeed,and has that -- have
those kinds of ideas been at the
heart of trying to improve the
schools, I think then
it would have been viewed as
something that really came more
authentically from the community
and from the people.
It was -- you know, people said
from the beginning, and I think
it was true, that there was a
consensus on the ground that the
Newark schools needed dramatic
change. Nobody thought the
schools -- that the status
quo was acceptable.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You write that
this was really a collection of
some of the broader
ideas of the reform movement
that have been percolating
across the country.
So does Newark say something
about the broader national
reform movement? What lessons
can
we learn as far as national
educational reform from what has
gone in Newark?
DALE RUSSAKOFF: Well, I think
that the education reform
movement is largely a movement
of,
you know, well-off people,
well-educated people who are
very, very concerned about the
status
of the schools, but -- and the
status of public education
nationally.
I think that there are also
people throughout the poorest
communities that are also very
concerned about education. And I
think the challenge that the
education reform movement
seems concerned with right now
is making sure that all of those
voices in the community,
the affected communities are
part of the answer, as opposed
to just being told what the
answer
is.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Obviously,
now, five years on, Cory Booker
is in the Senate, Chris Christie
is trying to become president,
but Mark Zuckerberg is still at
this, and -- but doing it in a
slightly different way.
And it seems as if he learned
something from Newark or decided
to change tack. Can you
tell me a little bit about what
he's doing out in California?
DALE RUSSAKOFF: Yes.
Well, he said from the outset
that -- you know, he was 26 when
this started, and he
said he wanted to do something
to help Newark, but he wanted to
become a better philanthropist
in the process, but he was very
open about how little he knew
about philanthropy and
about education.
So, he -- I think he was serious
about that. And the way he's
approaching the latest gift
-- he gave $120 million that's
going to be used in Bay Area
very underserved communities
for school improvement. And
instead of, you know, looking
for a model that can be imposed
on the school districts, he --
and he's had his staff of his
philanthropy spend a lot
of time in the communities to
try to make sure that what the
community wants is what
they're -- that what they're
doing is what the community
wants.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The book is
called "The Prize: Who's in
Charge of America's Schools?"
Dale Russakoff, thank you
so much for being here.
DALE RUSSAKOFF: Thank you
very much for having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online: Not everyone who marries
a U.S. citizen gets U.S.
citizenship. There are
exceptions to that rule. On this
week's podcast Shortwave, we
explore how those exceptions
have affected one family, who
have been barred for years
from returning to the United
States. We have a link to listen
on our home page,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And a reminder about some
upcoming programs from our PBS
colleagues.
Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington Week," which airs
later this evening. Here's a
preview:
GWEN IFILL: How Hillary Clinton
and Paul Ryan won the week, Joe
Biden's unsurprising exit,
while, on the Republican side,
Jeb Bush struggles, while Ben
Carson and Donald Trump lead the
field. We examine why this was
the week that was tonight on
"Washington Week" -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On "PBS NewsHour
Weekend" tomorrow: a personal
story of fleeing domestic
violence
in Honduras, one of the world's
most dangerous places for women.
NARRATOR: Lilian (ph) says her
boyfriend became increasingly
dangerous after he got involved
with a Mexican drug
cartel called Los Zetas.
WOMAN (through translator): He'd
threaten me if I spoke to the
police or made charges
against him. He threatened
to set fire to the house.
NARRATOR: Last year, an uncle in
Texas offered to pay smugglers
$4,000 to help Lilian flee
to the United States without a
visa, a risky trip that
thousands of other women opted
to
undertake as well. Lilian met
smugglers in Guatemala and began
the week-long trek through
Mexico.
WOMAN (through translator):
Sometimes, it's 24 hours in a
bus or walking. There are times
that you're locked up alone
in a place without food.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's tomorrow
on "PBS NewsHour Weekend."
And again to our honor roll of
American service personnel
killed in Iraq and the
Afghanistan
conflict. We add them as their
deaths are made official and
photographs become available.
Here, in silence, is one more.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank
you, and good night.